schema.rst, before:

Database schema for Rivulet
===========================

This document attempts to describe, in a general way, my current thoughts around a sketch for what the (ultimately SQL) database schema for Rivulet could look like.  I currently imagine that Rivulet would eventually support several database engines; I think I'll probably want to prototype with SQLite and then I will probably have energy for additional development to support PostgreSQL.  But I hope that the documentation here will be largely independent of the particular engine that we might use.

Common columns
--------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - name
    - the name of the thing
    - text
  * - description
    - the description of the thing
    - text
  * - updated
    - when the record was last updated
    - date and time

Users table
-----------

A Rivulet user can be either anonymous or authenticated.  What is the best way to model this dichotomy?  This is one approach.

.. list-table:: User table columns
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - the user's id
    - auto-incremented primary key
  * - email
    - the user's email address
    - text
  * - anonymous token
    - a token "authenticating" a user with an anonymous session
    - UUID

Watersheds table
----------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - the watershed's id
    - auto-incremented primary key
  * - branch size
    - the size of branches in this watershed (i.e. the number of users at which
      a branch is considered "full")
    - integer greater than 1

Branches table
--------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - the branch's id
    - auto-incremented primary key
  * - watershed id
    - the parent watershed for this branch
    - reference to the watershed, in n:1 correspondence
  * - conclusions
    - the text of any conclusions generated by the members of this branch
    - text
  * - head
    - Is the branch currently unrepresentated on further branches?

      This had been called "active". That was based on the following
      understanding (but I think "head" is a more useful generalization): Is
      the current branch still having active conversation?  This can be
      inferred from information in the `participation` table, so having this
      here is a sort of redundant check of the consistency of information
      there.
    - boolean
  * - progression
    - How many branch merges (and thus representation selections) does this
      branch represent?  This may (also) be inferred from the `participation`
      table.
    - non-negative integer

Participation table
-------------------

This table tracks how users are participating in branches throughout a space.  A user can be listed as participating in multiple branches in the same watershed, but only one of those is active; the others are historic, following a sequence of convergences back to an original branch.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - user id
    - the user whose participation we are tracking
    - reference to the user, in n:1 correspondence
  * - branch id
    - the branch under consideration that the user has participated in (and
      which is possibly their current branch).  If this is empty, it means that
      the user has been chosen as a representative, but has not yet joined a
      new branch.
    - reference to the branch, in n:1? correspondence
  * - branch source id
    - the branch that the user is representing in the current branch.  If this
      is empty, it means the user's participation in the current branch was as
      an entry into the watershed.
    - reference to the branch, in n:1? correspondence
  * - last seen
    - when the user was last noted to have connected to the branch
    - timestamp
  * - override
    - allow the user to access the branch ignoring normal participation
      restrictions (possibly for facilitation, dispute mediation, or because of
      a loss of history)
    - boolean

Messages table
----------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - an identifier for this message
    - auto-incremented primary key
  * - author id
    - the user who wrote the message
    - reference to the user, in n:1 correspondence
  * - content
    - the text of the message itself
    - text
  * - submitted
    - when the message was sent
    - timestamp
  * - branch id
    - the branch containing this message (i.e. by proxy the set of users who
      can see the message in a given watershed)
    - reference to the branch, in n:1 correspondence
  * - quoted message id
    - the message that this message optionally quotes
    - reference to the message, in n:1 correspondence
  * - proposal type
    - if this message is also a proposal, this field will be set to the type of
      the proposal.  Two options that I currently imagine are for summary
      proposals and representative proposals.
    - string, possibly curated list
  * - proposal input
    - the content of the proposal for consideration within the branch
    - text

Reactions table
---------------

Users can give reactions to messages; these reactions are stored in this table.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - the identifier for the reaction
    - auto-incremented primary key, possibly use (user id, type, message id)
      instead?
  * - user id
    - the user making the reaction
    - reference to the user, in n:1 correspondence
  * - intent 
    - the type of the reaction (e.g. "+1")
    - string, possibly curated list
  * - message id
    - the message targeted by the reaction
    - reference to the message, in n:1 correspondence
  * - submitted
    - when the reaction was sent
    - timestamp

Commit message:

More advanced branch interaction functionality
... also a document about future visioning

schema.rst, after:

Database schema for Rivulet
===========================

This document attempts to describe, in a general way, my current thoughts around a sketch for what the (ultimately SQL) database schema for Rivulet could look like.  I currently imagine that Rivulet would eventually support several database engines; I think I'll probably want to prototype with SQLite and then I will probably have energy for additional development to support PostgreSQL.  But I hope that the documentation here will be largely independent of the particular engine that we might use.

Common columns
--------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - name
    - the name of the thing
    - text
  * - description
    - the description of the thing
    - text
  * - updated
    - when the record was last updated
    - date and time

Users table
-----------

A Rivulet user can be either anonymous or authenticated.  What is the best way to model this dichotomy?  This is one approach.

.. list-table:: User table columns
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - the user's id
    - auto-incremented primary key
  * - email
    - the user's email address
    - text
  * - anonymous token
    - a token "authenticating" a user with an anonymous session
    - UUID

Watersheds table
----------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - the watershed's id
    - auto-incremented primary key
  * - branch size
    - the size of branches in this watershed (i.e. the number of users at which
      a branch is considered "full")
    - integer greater than 1

Branches table
--------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - the branch's id
    - auto-incremented primary key
  * - watershed id
    - the parent watershed for this branch
    - reference to the watershed, in n:1 correspondence
  * - conclusions
    - the text of any conclusions generated by the members of this branch
    - text
  * - head
    - Is the branch currently unrepresentated on further branches?

      This had been called "active". That was based on the following
      understanding (but I think "head" is a more useful generalization): Is
      the current branch still having active conversation?  This can be
      inferred from information in the `participation` table, so having this
      here is a sort of redundant check of the consistency of information
      there.
    - boolean
  * - progression
    - How many branch merges (and thus representation selections) does this
      branch represent?  This may (also) be inferred from the `participation`
      table.
    - non-negative integer

Participation table
-------------------

This table tracks how users are participating in branches throughout a space.  A user can be listed as participating in multiple branches in the same watershed, but only one of those is active; the others are historic, following a sequence of convergences back to an original branch.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - user id
    - the user whose participation we are tracking
    - reference to the user, in n:1 correspondence
  * - branch id
    - the branch under consideration that the user has participated in (and
      which is possibly their current branch).  If this is empty, it means that
      the user has been chosen as a representative, but has not yet joined a
      new branch.
    - reference to the branch, in n:1? correspondence
  * - branch source id
    - the branch that the user is representing in the current branch.  If this
      is empty, it means the user's participation in the current branch was as
      an entry into the watershed.
    - reference to the branch, in n:1? correspondence
  * - end status
    - indicates the reason why the user is no longer on the branch under
      consideration; if this is null, then the user should still be active on
      that branch.
    - string from curated list (e.g. abandoned, ejected, representative)
  * - last seen
    - when the user was last noted to have connected to the branch
    - timestamp
  * - override
    - allow the user to access the branch ignoring normal participation
      restrictions (possibly for facilitation, dispute mediation, or because of
      a loss of history)
    - boolean

Messages table
----------------

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - an identifier for this message
    - auto-incremented primary key
  * - author id
    - the user who wrote the message
    - reference to the user, in n:1 correspondence
  * - content
    - the text of the message itself
    - text
  * - submitted
    - when the message was sent
    - timestamp
  * - branch id
    - the branch containing this message (i.e. by proxy the set of users who
      can see the message in a given watershed)
    - reference to the branch, in n:1 correspondence
  * - quoted message id
    - the message that this message optionally quotes
    - reference to the message, in n:1 correspondence
  * - proposal type
    - if this message is also a proposal, this field will be set to the type of
      the proposal.  Two options that I currently imagine are for summary
      proposals and representative proposals.
    - string, possibly curated list
  * - proposal input
    - the content of the proposal for consideration within the branch
    - text

Reactions table
---------------

Users can give reactions to messages; these reactions are stored in this table.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - name
    - description
    - type
  * - id
    - the identifier for the reaction
    - auto-incremented primary key, possibly use (user id, type, message id)
      instead?
  * - user id
    - the user making the reaction
    - reference to the user, in n:1 correspondence
  * - intent 
    - the type of the reaction (e.g. "+1")
    - string, possibly curated list
  * - message id
    - the message targeted by the reaction
    - reference to the message, in n:1 correspondence
  * - submitted
    - when the reaction was sent
    - timestamp
